okay where oh great picture okay we are in oh this is magnificent hold this honey i don't know where we should begin uh these bookshelves the design the regular sketches are made by the really these were for the altieri archive you see there is sort of uh
They are in the, actually, you know, call of arms.
So they belong to Hope, and I don't know what they mean now.
These are all... In the 19th century, I think.
17th century?
Yes, and they moved in here in... I don't know why I'm after it.
Because these were done by... One of them, Camillo Massimo, he was the author.
and there is a painting made by Maratta, Carlo Maratta is famous century painter and another famous painting is made by Velázquez of him and he was a big collection of everything from Roman coins to
books and paintings.
I know that he was... And he... Yes.
He commissioned the paintings from Toussaint.
Toussaint, the last... Do you have anything by him or is it... Yes, we have... No, now they were divided but we have about six or seven paintings by Toussaint.
And he designed... He was... He could draw very well and apparently he...
He helped Poussin or Uvelazquez.
He drew with him.
I know.
He drew with him at Poussin.
He had a big collection of classical.
So this man, again, what is his name?
Camillo Massimo.
It's usually spelled Massimi.
Yes, because in the ancient time Massimi came from the Latin.
was referred to the whole family.
Massimi and Massimo is the same in the modern times.
And he's the designer of... No, this is made by Bernini and he commissioned to Bernini this library and the Palazzo Altieri.
He draws some of the pieces of the Palazzo Altieri which is near here.
But why were they moved here?
I think the Altieri sold them, I don't know exactly, maybe after the death of the Pope, or maybe because there was a marriage between Altieri and Massimo, I remember now.
Can you give me a date of when this was, about when?
Bookshelf?
Yes.
Approximately?
1600 and I don't know, 50.
1600 something.
16.
Bernini is 1600.
Yes.
Not the beginning of 1600, maybe.
So there is a lot of papers also for this cardinal here, and there are, for example, autographs, well, autographs, letters by Caravaggio,
by Poussin saying that I give Cardinal Camillo Massimi these paintings and so on.
Signed by Caravaggio, Poussin, Velázquez.
We have autographs by King of Spain and various kings.
These are basically the family archives?
Is this what we would call... How would you describe the papers that are in here?
Everything which had to do with the family, so things... For example, this is one of the indexes.
You can find a lot of... ...castles which were...
sold or which came to the family.
This is a lot.
This is all the famous and other things related to this palace, Palazzo delle Colonne.
Palazzo di Pirro is the other one here.
That's OK.
You point to where you started.
This is the palace.
which is the other one.
This one is a very big palace with a huge villa like Villa Borghese, Villa Doria, which belonged to Sisto Quinto, the Pope of Peretti.
What's the name of this?
This was called Villa Massimo alle Terme di Dio Cleziano.
And it was originally the villa of the Pope Sisto Quinto,
he was a Popperetti was his family name and then came into our family this villa and for example it belonged to what's called the Villa Palombara Palombara is the title of the Savelli family which now doesn't exist anymore it's a very old Roman family and we have the archive of the Savelli too because they were
The last Savelli married Massimo in the 18th century.
How do we spell that name?
Savelli.
S-A-V-E-W-L-I.
And this is part of the Savelli archive.
Savelli is a very old Roman family and they lived in this beautiful palace in... Theatro di Marcello.
It was first Palazzo Savelli and then Palazzo Orsini.
Are they living there now, Orsini?
Orsini, yes.
They're living there.
Yes.
And...
It is still called Monte Cavello.
So tell me what a scholar would learn if he or she came in and started going through the archives.
What kinds of things would we learn about the Massimores?
What kind of researches are coming here in a way?
These are, for example, the last people.
For example, they looked for this statue of Tirro.
Virro was the king of Epilus in the ancient times.
And she probably looked for documents when this statue was found.
And it was in this other palace, which is called Palazzo di Virro.
This one, it belongs to the familiar one.
And now it is in the Campidoglio, the collections of Rome.
It was a huge statue of Virro.
Which is Mars?
No, Pyrrho was the king of the Pyrrhus.
Yes, but I read something about the Confucian, so people thought it was Pyrrho.
They thought it was, yes.
And then perhaps Mars.
Well, they didn't know it.
Maybe it's Mars, but on his, how do you say, lorica, the coat, yes, the armor.
He had some elephants, so they thought it was Peter, because he came with the elephants to Rome, to invade the Italy of Rome.
So this is the formal name, the Archivo Hassa Massimo.
That is the formal name of the Hassa Massimo.
Yeah, excellent, most excellent.
Excellent piece, yeah.
Okay, let's do the whole thing.
This is not the whole, this is just the index.
I understand.
By the subject.
For example, this is various feudi lands and castles.
And here we have other... Here you can find it, for example,
Here you have all the dates.
And if you want to look for Cardinal Massimo, for example, Poussene and things like this, just go into here and look for Cardinal Massimo, Caffe, Poussene.
What is the date of this calligraphy here, would you suggest?
Well, the old archive was
Yes, during the Sacco di Roma in 1527.
So it was still in here.
This palace belonged to the family.
We don't know for how long, but there are papers in various archives which came to the year 1000 or 10th century.
10th century.
From the 10th century, but maybe earlier.
We don't know exactly, because all the older Cai was burned by the troops of Carlo Quinto, Charles XV.
Everything was burned in 1527, and we have some earlier papers, but not a lot.
So these dates from the 16th century, early 1500, up to now.
So very early the family realized how important it was to record its history, to keep its archives.
Yes, but everybody was doing this.
Because every payment, every whatever, I don't know, you were buying a statue, or Poussin came with a painting.
We had, for example, these autographs by him, or by Caravaggio.
I, Michelangelo Melisi, will give this painting too.
Like a deed or a receipt or contracts.
We call them contracts, I guess.
Well, it's not really a contract.
Yeah, but you can find a lot of things.
From payment made to tailor, to armor.
Well, you can determine the kinds of clothes they had, what kind of cutlery they had, what kinds of furnishings they had for the house.
Yes, we don't have just payment.
Then you can find all the letters from, for example, Gabriel Massimo to Caravaggio or to the King of Spain.
from Cristina Lisbethia for example.
Can we see some of this?
There are some letters between Cristina Lisbethia and Massimo because when she came here to Rome there was the famous Cagliostro, a magician.
And they organized in Palazzo Colonna some experiments with Cristina Ligretia, with Massimo and Calliostro, they were three or four.
Because I know she was involved in alchemy.
Exactly, it was all alchemy.
Calliostro was a big alchemist, very well known.
We just have to find some.
Okay, I think for my purposes it would be very good if we could have some specific items like
the kind of item you just suggested, if you have a letter to Queen Christina, if you have something to Caravaggio, this would be the kind of material that would be very useful.
Caravaggio and all this stuff is not in here.
It's closed in another... That makes sense, yeah.
...of the past, but now we can't see.
But it's also important, first, if you could tell me some of the things.
We have a letter to Caravaggio.
I can tell you maybe something else.
The first...
book which were printed in Rome.
It was printed in here.
Really?
The first press?
No, no, no.
In this room here, we don't know exactly where, but it was the first... The first printing press in Rome was in this building.
The first one was in Germany, no?
Yes, and my... No, no, first in Germany, and then two people who worked with Gutenberg,
They were called Schweinheim and Tannas.
They came to Subiaco and then they were brought here and they found the Mechinate in one of the masses.
And for example this was printed here.
So this is still the old binding.
Yeah, I've got to take a picture of that.
It's forty hundred and...
1497.
Can you just open it a little bit so we can see some of the printed pages?
Wait, I'll show you the last page because it was written in print.
Do you have the colorblind page there too?
Yes.
I think, yes.
Well, we have a lot of these.
It's very famous.
The binding is original, too.
Yes.
Which one is that?
It is 1497, but they began here in 1470, 57.
14?
They began here?
I'm not sure exactly.
Now we'll see it.
They began in 1457?
Well, yeah.
1460?
Yeah, 1460, yeah.
1460, question mark.
Wrong.
Look at the cat.
That's a different one.
He's guiding.
So, tell me, what is this book, the title of this book?
Arctic Knight.
But I see this is... Attic?
No, wait.
No, this is printed in Venice.
Yeah.
It's not this other one.
It's Venice.
This one.
But we have... I mean, we have a lot of these.
This is another one.
This is Herodoto, the history.
That's Herodotus' history.
This is made in...
In Rome, 1475.
Let me see.
By Panac.
And these are printed in here.
These are the first, these are the very first printers in Italy.
You're holding, basically, Subiaco, they printed about seven different... This book, yes, this book to Italy is what Gutenberg is to Germany.
These are the first printers in Italy.
That's what we're holding.
That excites me.
Yeah.
And here you can see all these books printed here in it.
I mean, the first ones printed in Rome.
Let's get the first one page.
Impressus Rome in domo nobilis viri petri de maximis.
In here.
1475.
Wow.
Let me write that down.
And the sixth is the fourth.
So it's Pietro e Massimo.
you find always maximi because it came from the latin the maximis so maximis is the plural but when do you think this book certainly is not a contemporary binding this is a much later binding so this is not in a library someplace outside of this did they have a formal library that that looks like a very formal binding yes no this is not very well i mean it is old but not as this one what i'm saying is did you keep the books in a formal library
yes they were together with the archive but not in here they were in another room it's a flat actually it's very big on the other side and we have all the frescoes with the press with the Scheinheim and Pannert printing books there are all these frescoes like this one with books so this has to be restored and so now it is moved because we are doing some restorations and this is a
temporary place for, yes, location for the archive.
You mentioned when we chatted on the phone that you were putting some of this on the web?
Yeah.
My idea was the following.
So I wanted to talk to, well, you told me I could talk to you.
The idea was putting all these indexes of the archives, not just of our archives, but some other Roman archives, in, for example, a CD-ROM, doing a
searchable index, and selling it to everybody who has to study something in archives.
Yes, for example.
We have a lot of requests from the United States to send photographs of certain documents and of this and that.
So it would be maybe very useful to everybody who studies archives or other things.
Not just historians, because you can find here
who did various dresses.
You can find a lot of things.
From what they ate to what they wore.
Many people would be interested in it.
That's social history, that's very important.
She had heard a lot of things.
Do you have an archivist who is cataloging it for you?
It is all catalogued.
This is one of the indexes.
And there we have other four books of indexes.
We have seven.
And there you can find, for example, papers of the Cardinale Camillo Massimo, 1620 to 1670.
or papers of Cristina Lisvezia and maybe we find... I think there was something... So you can see, these are very old bindings, we have... Or this book... For example this was...
the daughter of the king of Saxony, who married a Massimo in the 1800s.
These are, for example, papers of Princess Cristina of Saxony, where Massimo was she.
Married a Massimo from the year 1870 to 1827, then all the others.
And so you can find, and everything is in these indexes over there.
But there, you can find it in, you know,
letter of Cristina Uzvezia to Camillo Massi, for example.
So, putting all these indexes on the archive, it's very interesting for a lot of people, so they know exactly what they can find in the archive.
If you are studying Cristina Uzvezia or Poussin, you know that here you can find a lot of things about Poussin.
putting just not our archive, but some other archives on the same CD-ROM, for example, just the indexes, because you can't put all these things in just one CD-ROM.
Then you have a powerful tool to study history and then whatever.
So we have, for example, the Savelli family in here.
There are some other friends of mine that want to do these things.
So we will have all the Scalchi family, Colonna, Serlupli, Crescenzi, Teodoli.
And there will be a lot of... Tell me what these are.
These are the records that are indexed here?
These are records of, for example, Rocca Secca is a feudo, so land and castles.
And so you can see altri feudi, other lands, Rocca Secca.
So how does Rocca Secca, how does that... Rocca Secca is a town in Lazio.
So there was a family home there?
It was a family castle.
A family castle.
Castle and land.
This is another castle, Castello di Montefortino.
So this is everything which is this Montefortino, Montefortino.
How many castles do you have?
Well, there were quite a lot.
Nowadays, not very much.
But we have two or three castles.
Three castles.
But at that time there were approximately a quarter of Lazium belong to Massimo.
One quarter of where?
About, of Lazium, of the region around Rome.
Well, a lot, there was a lot.
In the year 1600, when there was this sacco di Roma, Pietro Massimo was the rich of many Rome.
At that time they had a lot of things.
1642 to 1853, that one book catalogs, indexes everything that happens?
Well, but just in Tivoli.
Just in Tivoli.
When you rent something.
So houses rented and land rented.
So it's just things belonging to rentals of land.
Okay.
Extraordinary.
And so, where are the three castles now?
You said there are three in the family.
There is one, Arsoli.
How do we spell that?
A-R-R-S-O-L-I.
And the other two are?
They are all in the Lazium.
They don't belong to the Massimo family, but to people related to us very closely.
Yes.
So they don't... Other branches of the family.
Yes, yes.
So what's the other...
Two places.
The one is called San... Oh, San... San... I think the design of the lock, it repeats.
Yes, this is always beautiful.
You should just take a photo of it.
Next.
It's beautiful.
San Girolamo.
Girolamo.
Girolamo, yes.
San Girolamo.
These are seals.
Is that seals?
Yes, in there there is something.
You should take a photo.
These are maybe of popes.
They had this bolle.
Oh, my God.
So do you have any, you must have cardinals in the family.
Do you have any popes in the family?
I brought you around this book.
Okay.
This was done in the 18th century.
On the family history, historical families.
This is about Massimo.
About two books.
And... Look at the seal.
Is this the seal?
Yeah.
But there is a better one in the... Okay, I want to get this way to go.
There is a beautiful one of the 16th century on the scene, just in the entrance.
They said there were two popes before the year 1000.
Two popes?
Can we name them?
And there is the famous Panvino, which was a famous...
He was a historian and he studied all the... Historical writer?
Yes, writer.
And he wrote a lot of books about historical things.
And he wrote one book about the history of the Massimo family.
And he had demonstrated that... Well, we say the Massimo family is the oldest in Italy.
So we say in the whole world.
Yeah, because Rome was very old.
Yes, that's the beginning.
So all our family descended from the family Fabia, which was the family of Quinto Fabio Massimo, was the Roman general who defeated Hannibal, who saved Rome.
Yes, that's what you say, and that's what got lost at 1527, the proof for that.
No, no, no.
Sorry?
The name of the general who defeated Hannibal?
Quinto Fabio Massimo.
Well, who saved Rome, so he was given the title of pater patrie, so father of the country.
But are you really sure?
Are you sure about that?
Yes.
How sure?
No, no, no.
It was then proved by Panvino.
And we have these books in the Vatican, too.
There are these manuscripts.
It was never published.
We have just manuscripts of him.
And he could show, he's shown until the year... This is the genealogy here.
Yes, but until the year... I wish you could get a picture of the genealogy.
Until the 10th century.
No, this is just one.
I know.
Very great.
This is old, you know.
Maybe you can fold it up a little bit.
Yes.
So this Panavino, he never published that book, is that right?
No, there are just manuscripts.
The Vatican Library has another one.
Van Vigne was a genius writer and he studied all these sort of things.
And he published a lot of things.
Books about Latium and... You should have it published.
I'm going to take a picture of it.
The history of your own family, I mean.
And for example, Tito Livio, the famous historian,
Talking about Quinto Fabio Massimo, he said that the Gens Fabia, so the family Fabia, said the Gens Fabia De Inde Maximorum Ditta.
So after he saved Rome, was called Massimo.
Ah, so that's the... Quinto Fito Livio.
Can you tell me the names of the popes, though?
Yeah, I'll have to... It was... Wait, one was, I think, Pasquale.
This is excellent.
And the other one was Canacleto.
Canacleto, I don't know which one.
Fasquale and Anacleto should be the two both.
That's good, this is excellent.
And the Quinto Fabio Massimo, so the Gens Fabia, was one of the patrician families in Rome, was very, very important.
And they were, they found Rome, fondato, were at the foundation of Rome.
So we say that our family is about 2,700 years old.
And the Gens Fabia, so the family Fabia, was, they said they came from Hercules, Hercules.
So we have all frescoes with the foundation of Rome, Hercules, we have tapestries with Hercules, statues, all things you can always find.
And here in the entrance, on the top, you have a beautiful coat of arms made by Peruzzi or Giulio Romano.
And there is Hercules with two snakes, because when he was a child he...
Hercules, the Greek?
Sorry?
Hercules?
Hercules, yes.
Oh, my God.
And holding our coat of arms is here.
So your family is ultimately descended from Hercules.
Exactly.
That's the point.
It's much better than books I've read so far.
Let me ask you, how important are the... Now, your name is Fabrizio.
Yes.
Who are you named for?
There is plenty of Fabrizio Matthew.
Two thousand years.
Wow.
It is overwhelming.
Tell me the names of your parents.
So who are you really?
In the family?
I guess that's what I'm driving at.
Well, I'm the oldest of the... In Roman families, you have just the oldest of the... The oldest man who has the title.
So Massimo are princes.
My father is the Prince Massimo.
You are not.
You will be.
I will be because I'm the oldest.
And I have another name, which is Brancaccio, and Brancaccio is another very old family, but of the south of Napoli and Sicily.
They were vicere di Napoli, vicere king of Naples, and it was another family which is very old, before the year 1000, they came with Carlo Magno,
How do you spell your other name?
Brancaccio.
Maybe when did you write it down?
Much more complicated.
Brancaccio is these other two castles.
Other castles were... Okay, so the Brancaccio owns... Brancaccio is another... Princess Brancaccio.
Does that have anything to do with the modern Palazzo Brancaccio?
Yes, that's of the family.
Here in the city, which is like a museum for something?
Yes, for Oriental Art.
Okay, so they own it, but they rent it to the museum.
It's rented, yes.
So we would describe you as Fabrizio Massimo, the son of Prince Massimo, right?
Yes.
And does he use a first name or just Prince?
Of course everybody has a first name, but formally my father is the Prince Massimo.
That is how we would refer to him in an article.
Fabrizio Massimo Brancaccio.
I am the Prince Massimo Brancaccio.
You are?
Yes.
My father is the Prince Massimo and the Prince Massimo Brancaccio.
No, I don't get it anymore.
Because Brancaccio was given to me because the family Brancaccio has no more hairs.
Okay, so you are a prince, but you are the Prince Massimo Brancaccio.
Yeah.
Right.
But you're not the Prince Massimo.
I will be.
You will be.
But I can't even split the two things.
Sure.
Because the last king of Italy, before he died, he gave me all the titles of the Brancaccio family.
Because my grand... The other one.
The mother of my grandmother was Brancaccio.
okay the last king what what did he last king of italy umberto the second yes well all the things related to aristocracy titles and things like this they they should belong to the king i mean if if somebody uh if the family ends then all these titles they go back to the car and then he's free to to redistribute them so he can
if you have the right on some titles.
So he gave me all the titles of the Brancaccio, because there were no more herons.
So your uncle who gave you these titles once again?
The King of Italy, the last King of Italy, which was my uncle, because my grandmother was the first cousin of the King, Savoia.
When did the last King die?
About 10 years ago, 15 years ago, 1980,
I don't know the exact date, it's about 15 years ago.
So you're not only a prince then, you're like a Duke and several other titles as well?
Yes, yes.
Tell us some, tell us some.
So, my father is the Prince of Atsoli.
Atsoli is this castle we still have.
A-R-S-O-L-I.
Why don't you write them down?
Oh, there is.
A-R-S-O-L-I.
Why don't you keep it?
Well, we have a lot.
Allora, Principe.
I am Principe di Roviano.
Roviano is his other castle which was Massimo and then
went to Brancaccio because they married him.
So this is my father, this is me.
I'm Duca di Lustre.
This is my son.
Marchese di Montescaglioso.
That's you.
That's all me.
Ah.
I forgot, Principe again, the Bridge of Yano.
This is me.
And then some other titles, small titles, it's like Nobile of this, Nobile di Napoli.
But really, you know, you're... My father has other titles.
Yes, but the... Principe di of Yano.
In fact, it means much more to be Musmo than all those titles, right?
Yes, so the only title is
and Principe Massimo, so the title of Prince on the surname.
This is another title.
So like you have the Principe Colonna, it's just one.
Principe de Scalchi.
So this is 25, that's 29, 24.
What are the significance of these numbers on the bookcases?
You can find them in here.
You have to look for a paper, and in there it's written Armadio, 25, shelf 4,
number 167.
There are a lot more in the in the flat over there where the archive has always been but now it moved so we have lots of in here because there were more than 30 29 there are some others
Tell us a little bit briefly about what was on the ceiling.
I see a tantalizing fragment of... Yeah, we don't know because it has to be restored and it will come out.
Is it underneath the plaster?
Yes, yes.
Oh my goodness.
That's underneath.
So it's been painted over?
Yes, it's underneath.
So if you restore, you think the picture will emerge?
Yes, of course.
Well, that has.
You see that.
This was done recently.
This, August 6th century, it was made, all this, by the school of Raffaello, Giulio Romano, Pierin del Vaga, Aldassare Peruzzi, Daniele da Volterra.
And these bookcases, all of these bookcases were made by that... Bernini.
Bernini.
Well, not made, but designed.
And we found the designs of this, many of these faces, and the old, they are in, I don't know, in Windsor Castle or in Paris, I don't remember where, maybe the original drone is.
What do you call this room?
Do you have a name for this room that we're in here?
No, now it is... What do you think it originally was?
What was the purpose of this room when it was first...
a function I guess.
I'm just thinking for when I'm writing this story how we would describe it.
Where are we in the building?
This is the Patel, let's say.
It's just on the right of the entrance.
About here there are all the big rooms
With, again, all these frescoes with the foundation of Rome, stories of Hercules.
Now, I understand once a year you... Tatuies, all above us.
Can we see some of these things?
No, it's not possible.
But I can show you some frescoes which are on the portico up here.
Whatever you can show us would be greatly appreciated.
And then secondly, I understand once a year you open the house up on the Saints Day.
Could you tell us a little bit about that?
This is the 16th of March.
Yes, I was there.
The 16th of March?
Yes, yes.
The 16th of March.
And it was because of San Filippo Neri, so this saint.
What?
San Filippo Neri.
I'm going to write the album down.
Now we'll find it.
And he worked with Massimo, Paolo Massimo, who died.
and the father and all the family at that time was very, was in friendship with the San Filipponelli.
So for example in this church now, in this chapel you saw, we have a lot of reliquie.
Relicaries.
Not the relicaries.
Relicaries where you keep the relics.
Yes, no, no, no.
The things you keep in the relicaries of San Filipponelli.
We have a very
The strange thing is, for example, we have the... How do you call it?
Spectacles?
Yes, exactly, of San Filippo Neri.
You have the spectacles of... We have a lot of things of San Filippo Neri, because it was very friendly.
Here you see a Fabrizio of the 16th century.
Fabrizio is always... Pietro, Fabrizio, Fabrizio, Pietro, Camillo.
I read that he was living out in your... Paolo Massimo.
He was born in 1569 and his birth was predicted by San Filippo Neri because he had five daughters.
The father was Fabrizio Massimo.
He had a lot of daughters.
He had about twenty sons.
Nineteen dollars and one.
And the birth of the son was predicted by San Filippo Neri.
For example, San Filippo Neri told him to buy arzoli, which we still own.
And he told him to sell this, buy this, and... To sell, buy what was it again?
He told you to buy what?
He told him, Fabrizio, to buy, you know, lands, castles, or sell these castles.
So Filippo Neri was an advisor to... Exactly, because they were so very...
So he told us, asked Fabrizio Massimo at that time in the 16th century, to buy the castle of Arcelino all the land around, which we still own.
So it was a good advice.
And there is a prediction about our family he made, and he said that the Massimo family will always have a male hearse, so it will never end.
And they will always have bread, so they'll always have something to eat.
We won't starve.
But sometimes it takes 19 daughters to do it.
Yes, but the 20th wasn't the right one.
No, it wasn't the right one because he died.
And he had another one.
No, because he had first five daughters, then Paolo, which died, and then the other Pietro, Giambattista.
And so names of the family is always Fabrizio, Pietro, Camillo,
So Fabrizio, and then the son was Pietro, and then the son was Fabrizio again, Fabrizio Camillo.
And we have one thing, that every first, I mean, when the new Prince Massio, let's say, even if it is, as soon as one is born, he gets the name Camillo.
The first one.
Yes, just the first one.
So you see Camillo the 4th, Camillo the 5th, there's always just one.
As soon as you... For every generation there is one.
And then they were called, for example, in the Bartesimo, Meri Fabrizio Pietro.
So there is Camillo... I'm, for example, Camillo the 18th.
But why... Because it was... There was... Legato.
Legato.
Well, the first one had to be Camillo.
Yes.
And from... But Fabrizio, was that the second name?
No.
This name was before the baptism.
So as soon as you were born and you were the future prince, you were Camillo.
So this was Camillo IV, this was... So your name is Camillo XVIII?
No, my name is Fabrizio.
But I am also...
Camillo, 18.
18.
Like, for example, in France.
Before you got your name, you were... Yes, exactly.
Now, do you have children?
No.
So, when you have a son, that son will be Camillo the 19th?
The 19th, yes.
Now we are beginning to understand.
Okay.
Like the king of France.
And he will be Camillo the 19th even before he's baptized.
Exactly.
And when you're baptized, you will be...
Giovanni, Fabrizio, Pietro, or Camillo, if you like the name Camillo.
May I ask you how old you are?
Yes, 34.
You live here in Rome?
Yes.
You live in this village?
I live between Rome and the country, and it's a little bit complicated.
It's still rough.
I'm always around.
But I live here and in the countryside, near Rome, not in Arsoli.
Very natural.
Why have they crossed some of them?
Is there any significance to that?
Yes, maybe these are the paintings.
I don't know exactly.
I think it's the paintings we still have of.
Of those.
I think, yeah.
Interesting.
So San Filippo then, this Paolo Massimo died, and San Filippo brought him again to life.
He brought him to life.
Yes, it was a miracle.
And he was... Here in this building?
Yes, in this building, and the room of Paolo Massimo, where the miracle happened, is now chapel, and then it was given the privileges of church, which I don't know what it means, but... And so once you're here to honor this saint, on his day, you open up the... Yes, every day, from every 16th of March, from the year 1583,
It is opened and we have masses being set all day long, well, in the morning.
And we have cardinals and a lot of other priests who come to see mass.
How many other archives do you think there are like this in Rome?
Do you think this is unique?
Do you think there's anything else like this?
No, no, no.
There are a lot.
Like this.
What other families do you think?
Not that I want to see them.
Yes, yes, yes.
No, no, there's no problem.
There are a lot of families.
The Vatican has... No, no, the Vatican has a lot of archives belonging to Roman families.
Because they gave them to keep it.
Like the Borghese archive is in the Vatican.
Do they still have the Palazzo Borghese?
Yes.
They do?
But they lost the museum, the villa.
Yes, yes, it was.
A little scandal then.
Yes, a lot of people lost.
We lost our villa of the Sisto Quinto Cosi.
Now there is the Stazione Termini on it.
It was expropriated.
Did you get any money for it?
No, hardly.
It was in 19th century, before Italy.
Right.
Okay, so San Filippo Neri became saint from this miracle too.
He did a lot of miracles, but this was the most famous.
He died, Paolo, and then... Yeah, he died, woke up, and then he died again?
Yes, because Paolo Massimo wanted to talk to San Filippo Neri because he was ill.
And he couldn't get in time to see him still alive, so he began to pray.
And then Paulo Massimo woke up again.
They talked a little bit, and then he asked if he wanted to go back, because the mother of him already died.
And he said, no, I want to go to my mother, so I want to die again.
So he died again.
Quite a story.
He wanted to see his mother and one of his daughters.
And it's all written here in the archive.
This is the genealogy, right, this book that you're holding?
A piece.
This goes to the year 1000 or shortly before the year 1000.
You showed us a couple of incunabula.
Do you have a lot of incunabula here?
Yes.
No, no, we have.
These are elsewhere in the house, right?
Yes, yes.
I wanted to show you this...
signatures of Caravaggio or something else.
Yeah, that would be nice.
They are not, because there is nobody in here now.
They are closed in a couple, maybe on Monday, but I'm not sure, because we had some problems.
Yeah, Monday.
We were all on the countryside.
Monday, I have appointments with the Vatican Library, but maybe in the afternoon, we can photograph them.
Whatever.
We'll see.
It is not in here now.
And we have, yes, some others in Cannaboli.
And we have a lot.
I mean, the library is not in here.
We have lots of books.
Because in the 19th century... Oh, look at that.
Ah, this is lovely.
Madras.
Ah, this is the Cardinale.
Oh, let's take a minute.
They've made portraits of them?
This is made by Marasta.
This is the miracle of San Pedro.
Oh, my goodness.
You have to take a picture.
Could you just hold it up?
Excuse me.
Did you want to take a picture, Nicole?
I could just hold it up a little bit like this, so I can take a picture.
Take one first.
I'm going to get one back here with you in the picture, like this.
Now I'm going to come a little closer and get one like this.
Okay, thank you.
And these are all family members.
Are these portraits, original portraits, that were drawn in the book?
These are famous portraits, yeah.
This is of Sermoneta, 16th century.
This is Sermoneta again.
This is Maratta.
Maratta was probably the most famous painter of the 17th century.
Maratta did these paintings?
Yes, a lot of paintings by Maratta.
Because he was a mecenate, so he
That's Cardinal Camillo Massimo.
And what are his years?
Are they there?
No, Cardinal Camillo.
Sorry?
What are his years, the years that he lived?
No, 1700, no, 1620.
I'd love to get there.
Beginning of the, let's say, 17th century.
Okay, and this is Francesco Massimo, and what was his... He was in Castel Sant'Angelo.
Castellano was the... not the owner of Castel Sant'Angelo, because it was of the Pope.
It was the one who, let's say, like Gerard, who was in charge of Castel Sant'Angelo.
And this is Angelo Massimo.
Fascinating.
And that's the miracle.
It's the miracle.
Here's San Filippo Neri.
This is the room up on the second floor.
Now it's all closed.
And this is the Palazzo.
And the room was subsequently turned into his chapel.
He had huge collections of Roman coins, of statues, of
You mentioned he was a collector of many things.
Yeah, the Palazzo, now the Palazzo del Drago, which is in Via Quattro Fontane, a huge palazzo, was built by him, and, well, by him, was his palace, and there he had all these huge collections, which is a huge palace.
And he filled it?
It was full of things.
Palazzo del Drago.
Belonged to him.
And he was...
Camillo.
But you don't have that one anymore.
What?
Palace.
No, no, it belongs to the Drago.
Yes, after he died, he spent so much in art things that a lot of things had to do.
But we still have... Are there any other portraits or just these pages?
Oh, maybe yes.
These are some of the things we have.
These are the...
of the 10th century, the old Massimo of the year 1900 or something, yes.
Is that the 6th century?
These were sculptures that were done?
No, this is like this one.
It's made of wood.
Of wood, okay.
Fresh cars.
Is it a crest?
No, no.
A crest?
No, I don't think you open it.
Oh, just a chest.
A chest.
So these are the drawings of the chest, the plans or whatever.
And you still have these chests.
They're very ancient.
Do these chests still exist?
Yes, yes, we have them.
And they're from what century again?
16th century.
You can see here these are all of them and this was the wife of him.
They did it when they married.
So it's all wood with gold.
They are very precious because they are very old.
And they are quite rare.
By the way, it's looking a bit like a coffin, so I have to ask, where's your family church, family burial place?
We have different, because the farm is very big.
Yeah, here there is one.
But in Arsoli we have a chapel.
And there is in Laterano, in Trinità dei Monti,
You raise an interesting point.
You say you have a large family.
How large is the family right now?
Right now?
Yes.
Massimo family is not very large, but we have lots of... We're related to nearly all the... How do you say?
No, no.
like kings of France, Borbone, Savoia.
I'm a descendant of the stewards, so kings of England.
The stewards of England?
The Windsors?
No, stewards.
The Windsors came late.
So this was a guy with Cagliostro and 59th grade.
No, maybe it was the... Calioso was the 18th century.
Christiane-Sweze was the end of the 17th century, the end.
This is Savoia again.
Oh, that's so lovely.
Before the unity of Italy.
That's lovely.
Has anyone written the history of your family?
Yes.
The unpublished book.
And then published history by, what's his name again?
Can you spell it?
Can you spell it for us?
It's very famous, Onofrio.
Why isn't it published?
Is it?
I don't know.
Is that at the Vatican?
There's other books by Fandinho.
But I'm surprised the family doesn't publish it.
But because we have the...
Oh, these are beautiful.
These are like lithographs.
Oh, I saw this.
These are, sorry, but this is an old... That's the family castle?
Yeah, now it seems a little... It's bigger.
It's bigger now?
No, it was bigger at the time.
It's viewed from a strange point of view.
For example, here there is a huge... It's a huge park.
And we have even a garden in the Giardino Pensile.
Sounds beautiful.
Now you said you still own Pensile?
Yes.
You still have Pensile.
And it's bigger than this now?
These are the Theodi of the Messino Pensile.
So I told you it was about a quarter of the last.
It was huge.
This is Rome here down in Napoli.
Regno di Napoli.
This was their property around Rome.
They owned one quarter of the property around Rome.
About and even on.
So, what do you do now?
Are you involved in agriculture in any way?
Yes.
Is there a family business?
Well, the agricultural means.
Well, I wouldn't call it a business.
It's not a real business.
What is it?
We have a lot of land to steal.
Do you rent it out to farmers?
No, no, we calculate it.
You calculate it?
Yes, but it's not a real business.
What kinds of things do you raise?
Lots of olives and granules.
And that again, is it Astley?
Astley, Astley.
We have other land around the world, not just that.
Good.
Anything to be missing?
Oh, it's just if we could see some, you know, Queen Christine or something.
Or is everything away in the close part?
No, no, no.
In the close part, we have all these autographs, like Caravaggio, things of Spain, of France, Hussein Velázquez.
Here we have, maybe even on Christiane Isletia.
We can find something here if you like, but we have to look in the other end.
And the signatures that you would have here of Caravaggio and the Kings, it would be letters that were exchanged in the course of routine business, shall we say.
For example, what?
Because all these Matthews, they had some works in, well,
It was not a work in Carichi.
This Camillo Massimo, for example, he went to Spain.
He was Archbishop in Spain.
We are related to the kings of Spain.
The wife of... It's not an uncle, Prozio.
It was the uncle of my grandfather.
He married one of the Borbone of Spain, and after Franco died, she was one of the possible heres to the throne.
And then he went to Juan Carlos, and she was one of them.
Then we are led to the Luigi, king of France, like Louis XIV, the son king.
And so...
And we have lots of letters of kings and of important persons because all this Massimo had some important things to do in politics.
So there's correspondence with Louis XIV, you say?
There's correspondence with... There are correspondences.
I don't know now with who, but there is correspondence with nearly everybody in Europe.
And we are descendants even from Borbone, so the king of Spain of...
King of France and Savoia and all.
You mentioned earlier that a lot of the other families have turned their archives over, say, to the Vatican.
Is this something that you had considered or would consider at some point?
No, it stays in the family in perpetuity, I would guess.
That's why I wanted to do this.
Maybe you need an archivist.
Maybe it should be more secure than it is now?
Yes, no, we have somebody who comes from time to time, but now we have to, again,
I mean, maybe it needs a little professional attention in terms of security and stuff like that.
Yeah, maybe.
It works.
It's invaluable.
I mean, you can't, it's priceless.
You could not replace these things.
That's why I wanted to, I had this project, to put all the archives.
It's very difficult to put it on.
Tell me about your project.
Let's go again.
You were mentioning the CD.
Is this a project that you've actually begun or it's something that you're thinking about?
I'm thinking about it.
I already talked to other people who have archives and they want to do this.
The idea is to do a
for example cd-rom or even put it on the web or whatever but it's not not just your archives but also other other archives so if you have to find something you can do you have a website yes you have a website yeah so we can i can actually go to your website and see what's on there yes but now there is there is no archive right so it's massimo.it probably dot it for it yeah or mass yeah massimo dot it
But there is nothing related to the family now, it's just some general stuff.
What was your thinking in terms of Biblio?
I mean, what would you want me to relay to Pauline's self?
In terms of marketing, is that what you were interested in?
Yeah, for example, yes.
Because it would be interesting to know if there is a, I don't know, if you have an idea or if she has an idea,
of who will buy this product, how many people, or if it can be sold even through the Biblio.
I'm not so sure.
I will certainly mention it to her, but I think that there may be other ways to look at that too.
I mean, I think it certainly has a great scholarly interest that may not be reached by Biblio.
Maybe there are other ways to reach this.
It was just an idea.
I think maybe I can give you some ideas on that.
Yes, why not?
Let me think about it.
My question was, if you or she is interested in a sort of collaboration, so we could see how to do it.
Because it is quite difficult to digitize all these things.
You can still read what is written here and just type it on the computer.